future-mathml2.md, before:

# Some thoughts on Native MathML

> Do not worry about your difficulties with MathML; I can assure you that mine are still greater.
>
> — [not Albert Einstein](http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Albert_Einstein#1940s).

I have written about why [I care about MathML](/0175/) and why I care about [Native MathML](/0176/). Time to talk about some of the problems I see.

This piece reflects my personal opinions and is not indicative of the position of any project I might work on, in particular not MathJax, let alone the W3C Math Working Group. This is also not a rant about MathML. It is meant as a conversation starter.

In case it's still not clear, let me repeat myself: I care very much about MathML and in particular the mission of the Math Working Group [to facilitate and promote the use of the Web for mathematical and scientific communication](http://www.w3.org/Math/Documents/Charter2006.html). While MathML has succeeded everywhere else, it struggles on the web.

Now friends who read the draft pointed out that what follows might still give the impression of a rant against MathML. If you're inclined to say something like "this guys says MathML is bad! OMG it must be so bad!" or alternatively "this guy does not believe in true and righteous MathML! OMG he must be so evil!"; well, actually, I probably can't change your mind so what do I care.


## The rise and fall of MathML

MathML did not start out as an XML language but as the `<math>` tag in HTML3. It was the browser vendors (Microsoft, Netscape) who rejected it; as a result, `<math>` went into XML "exile" (where it was immensely successful) and returned to HTML in HTML5.

Still, all OWP technologies stand and fall with the support and adoption from browser vendors. It does not matter how good (or bad) a web standard is or how well it works elsewhere. Browser vendor adoption is the only relevant measure.

# No news is not good news

It's been almost two years since I started to write ["MathML forges on"](http://radar.oreilly.com/2013/11/mathml-forges-on.html).

Back then, native browser support seemed to be on the tipping point. Dave Barton had done amazing work on improving Alex Milowski's WebKit code, the deactivation in Chrome seemed to be a hiccup due to a single bug that already had a fix. It seemed, with a little luck, Gecko and WebKit would have made it to the 80/20 point within a year, hopefully in turn get the Blink/Chrome team to re-enable MathML, and then we'd watch as Trident (now Edge) would hurry to integrate the math support from Line Services.

Two years later, Gecko has moved sideways, WebKit has barely moved, Trident/Edge remains a mystery, and Blink is "the villain". MathML is still the only viable markup language for mathematics (recently reaffirmed by its ISO standardization), and yet, native browser support seems just as far away as ever.

Why?

## Who implements native MathML support?

Gecko's and WebKit's (still quite partial) support has been almost exclusively implemented by volunteer contributors (mostly unpaid volunteers at that).

Effectively, no browser vendor has ever worked on MathML support in their browser. (Yes, that's a bit unfair to Mozilla devs who are great -- sorry. There are also good people at Apple, Google, Microsoft; still, the companies all fail to invest in MathML browser support.)

The volunteers, on the other hand, come and go. Nobody is able to find significant funding and development is, once again, effectively dead.

I'm afraid I don't see how we can ever get native MathML support in browsers; the volunteer method does not work and the vendors remain uninterested.

## Where could we go instead?

The fact that browser vendors do not implement MathML says virtually nothing about MathML. Studying past discussions, it's clear that there isn't a lot of knowledge about the spec or the requirements of mathematical layout. (Again, this is a little unfair to some Mozilla devs.)

So I see no reason to give up on MathML, let alone math and science notation on the web. Because one thing has not changed: it's still the best markup for math and education, industry, and research need a good markup that works on the web.

Even without native browser implementations being a realistic goal, I think MathML can still be a trail blazer, especially for scientific notation. It is, after all, a long standing W3C standard and we know it works very well in a browser context (even if you need polyfills).

I think there are two problems we can focus on that are just as useful to move scientific markup forward and the web in general forward:

1. how to do mathematical layout using the web standards that are actually being implemented (and how to improve both)
2. how to expose the underlying scientific markup such as MathML (e.g., math notation beyond MathML, but also CML, PhyloXML, CellML etc).

As opposed to native browser support for MathML, both of these are extremely feasible.

First, modern browsers (IE9+) are good enough now; you can write converters from MathML to HTML or SVG markup so that the result is stable, i.e., provides the same layout on all browsers, comparable to TeX quality but naturally integrated into the page context. To be clear, this is not (just) about client-side rendering like MathJax (in fact, you'll have to wait for our next release to see such an implemenation in MathJax).

The only problem is that the necessary markup itself is messy, making it hard to generate -- just look at the spans-spans-spans that MathJax currently generates. However, I think this situation is not unlike how grids using Bootstrap or Foundation are overly complicated compared to examples using css-grid layout. Or how doing flexbox-like layout is horribly complicated without flexbox.

I think we can (and should) focus on implemented standards and work on improving them so that the markup you need for good math layout becomes cleaner and thus easier to generate (both in terms of structure and performance).

Second, looking at the developments of the semantic web, it's obviously not being realized in terms of mandated HTML tags or CSS properties. It is being realized via ARIA roles, RDFa, microdata etc. To be clear, I'm not saying the semantic structure of MathML (or really: math and science more generally) fits on those (right now or ever) but that something along those lines seems more realistic than waiting for <del>Godot</del> native browser support to come around.

Frankly, I'm a bit tired of waiting; MathML is frozen because we're all waiting for native support and it is simply. not. happening. Let's move forward.

Commit message:

Scripted auto-commit on change (2015-08-09 22:17:20) by gitwatch.sh

future-mathml2.md, after:

# Some thoughts on Native MathML

> Do not worry about your difficulties with MathML; I can assure you that mine are still greater.
>
> — [not Albert Einstein](http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Albert_Einstein#1940s).

I have written about why [I care about MathML](/0175/) and why I care about [Native MathML](/0176/). Time to talk about some of the problems I see.

This piece reflects my personal opinions and is not indicative of the position of any project I might work on, in particular not MathJax, let alone the W3C Math Working Group. This is also not a rant about MathML. It is meant as a conversation starter.

In case it's still not clear, let me repeat myself: I care very much about MathML and in particular the mission of the Math Working Group [to facilitate and promote the use of the Web for mathematical and scientific communication](http://www.w3.org/Math/Documents/Charter2006.html). While MathML has succeeded everywhere else, it struggles on the web.

Now friends who read the draft pointed out that what follows might still give the impression of a rant against MathML. If you're inclined to say something like "this guys says MathML is bad! OMG it must be so bad!" or alternatively "this guy does not believe in true and righteous MathML! OMG he must be so evil!"; well, actually, I don't know what to say to that. If you use those words, you're probably trolling.


## The rise and fall of MathML

MathML did not start out as an XML language but as the `<math>` tag in HTML3. It was the browser vendors (Microsoft, Netscape) who rejected it; as a result, `<math>` went into XML "exile" (where it was immensely successful) and returned to HTML in HTML5.

Still, all OWP technologies stand and fall with the support and adoption from browser vendors. It does not matter how good (or bad) a web standard is or how well it works elsewhere. Browser vendor adoption is the only relevant measure.

# No news is not good news

It's been almost two years since I started to write ["MathML forges on"](http://radar.oreilly.com/2013/11/mathml-forges-on.html).

Back then, native browser support seemed to be on the tipping point. Dave Barton had done amazing work on improving Alex Milowski's WebKit code, the deactivation in Chrome seemed to be a hiccup due to a single bug that already had a fix. It seemed, with a little luck, Gecko and WebKit would have made it to the 80/20 point within a year, hopefully in turn get the Blink/Chrome team to re-enable MathML, and then we'd watch as Trident (now Edge) would hurry to integrate the math support from Line Services.

Two years later, Gecko has moved sideways, WebKit has barely moved, Trident/Edge remains a mystery, and Blink is "the villain". MathML is still the only viable markup language for mathematics (recently reaffirmed by its ISO standardization), and yet, native browser support seems just as far away as ever.

Why?

## Who implements native MathML support?

Gecko's and WebKit's (still quite partial) support has been almost exclusively implemented by volunteer contributors (mostly unpaid volunteers at that).

Effectively, no browser vendor has ever worked on MathML support in their browser. (Yes, that's a bit unfair to Mozilla devs who are great -- sorry. There are also good people at Apple, Google, Microsoft; still, the companies all fail to invest in MathML browser support.)

The volunteers, on the other hand, come and go. Nobody is able to find significant funding and development is, once again, effectively dead.

I'm afraid I don't see how we can ever get native MathML support in browsers; the volunteer method does not work and the vendors remain uninterested.

## Where could we go instead?

The fact that browser vendors do not implement MathML says virtually nothing about MathML. Studying past discussions, it's clear that there isn't a lot of knowledge about the spec or the requirements of mathematical layout. (Again, this is a little unfair to some Mozilla devs.)

So I see no reason to give up on MathML, let alone math and science notation on the web. Because one thing has not changed: it's still the best markup for math and education, industry, and research need a good markup that works on the web.

Even without native browser implementations being a realistic goal, I think MathML can still be a trail blazer, especially for scientific notation. It is, after all, a long standing W3C standard and we know it works very well in a browser context (even if you need polyfills).

I think there are two problems we can focus on that are just as useful to move scientific markup forward and the web in general forward:

1. how to do mathematical layout using the web standards that are actually being implemented (and how to improve both)
2. how to expose the underlying scientific markup such as MathML (e.g., math notation beyond MathML, but also CML, PhyloXML, CellML etc).

As opposed to native browser support for MathML, both of these are extremely feasible.

First, modern browsers (IE9+) are good enough now; you can write converters from MathML to HTML or SVG markup so that the result is stable, i.e., provides the same layout on all browsers, comparable to TeX quality but naturally integrated into the page context. To be clear, this is not (just) about client-side rendering like MathJax (in fact, you'll have to wait for our next release to see such an implemenation in MathJax).

The only problem is that the necessary markup itself is messy, making it hard to generate -- just look at the spans-spans-spans that MathJax currently generates. However, I think this situation is not unlike how grids using Bootstrap or Foundation are overly complicated compared to examples using css-grid layout. Or how doing flexbox-like layout is horribly complicated without flexbox.

I think we can (and should) focus on implemented standards and work on improving them so that the markup you need for good math layout becomes cleaner and thus easier to generate (both in terms of structure and performance).

Second, looking at the developments of the semantic web, it's obviously not being realized in terms of mandated HTML tags or CSS properties. It is being realized via ARIA roles, RDFa, microdata etc. To be clear, I'm not saying the semantic structure of MathML (or really: math and science more generally) fits on those (right now or ever) but that something along those lines seems more realistic than waiting for <del>Godot</del> native browser support to come around.

Frankly, I'm a bit tired of waiting; MathML is frozen because we're all waiting for native support and it is simply. not. happening. Let's move forward.
