---
layout: post
title: A first look at MathJax v4
date: 2023-12-31
permalink: 0222/
---

So here on the blog (and at work) I've been rolling out MathJax v4 after it hit [its third beta](https://github.com/mathjax/MathJax-src/releases/tag/4.0.0-beta.3) in July. MahthJax v4 is chock full of fixes, features and even a tiny bit of finally-getting-rid-of-stuff. To close off the year, I thought I'd sum up my personal highlights.

Here's my (obviously totally personal and biased) short list.

## STIX Two (and fonts in general)

I've been using the experimental STIX2 branch in production for a few years but now that Davide had time to completely rewrite the fonts support, the generalization leads to a lot of small (and large) improvements in STIX Two again. It's lovely to see the best font keeps getting better. (And yes, a better default CM-derived font is cool too, as are the other options!)

Working together on a small project to build a custom font earlier this year also gave me a first look into the fantastic capabilities (and slightly scary machinery) behind the new font tooling. I can't wait to see what people might do when it's opened up to the public.

## line breaking

While I don't care much about line breaking inside display elements these days, inline reflow has been on my wish list for a long time. But what I hadn't expected at all was Davide adding support for MathJax's SVG output. 

That's a bit unbelievable, really, but MathJax v4 will split up the SVG output into reflowable chunks which is *just* lovely. I wished the webfont hack could be avoided but I'm looking forward to hacking a decent compromise there so that this becomes usable in the horrors of epub, too (where I need it the most).

## ESM

You might say "it's about damn time!" but it's super sweet to see this move, even if it broke everything during the beta for me.  I don't think I'll ever like MathJax's custom build system for its "components" but [with Davide's patient help](https://github.com/mathjax/MathJax/issues/3086) I could move my third party extensions over to the new system.

## TeX input

Soo many improvements! A lot of subtle changes matching LaTeX behavior more accurately, a few more extensions.

If I had to pick just one thing, [HTML-in-TeX support](https://github.com/mathjax/MathJax-src/pull/783) would be it. The potential seems boundless as MathJax is not limited by obnoxious theoretical-purity nonsense but instead embraces HTML. Which is as it should be.

## non-visual rendering

SRE also saw a massive set of enhancements in [its recent releases](https://github.com/Speech-Rule-Engine/speech-rule-engine/releases). Better performance, more languages, 2D nemeth, plenty of bug fixes. Amazing work by Volker - nothing gets even close to SRE's range of non-visual capabilities.

Even more importantly, SRE will (finally!) be active by default in v4 - the most accessible output as the default is good in my book.

## coda

There'd be much more to write but the year is over. For balance, any complaints? I think the only one  I found would be testing which was painful at times - but that's what you get for adopting a beta release. Still, I don't know how I'd feel if I didn't know how good Davide and Volker are (and if I didn't know how much testing happens at the AMS).

Of course I still wished that MathJax was not so focused on being client-side first. It is without competition when it comes to server-side-rendering, too - the most robust and most accessible option available. More people need to hear that! But of course I remember why that is: MathJax users love the ease of client-side rendering, they have never cared about the downsides (e.g., page load, performance). Still, I'll keep spreading the word.

As it stands MathJax v4 is a massive step forward, proving again that MathJax is the only reliable project to make progress in this space. 
