---
layout: post
title: Matrices vs. idempotent ultrafilters part 2
date: 2010-01-07 10:00:00.000000000 +01:00
categories:
- research
- thelazyscience@blogspot
tags:
- finite semigroup
- idempotent
- Macaulay
- semigroup
- Stone-Cech compactification
status: publish
type: post
published: true
meta:
  _edit_last: '3'
  _wpas_skip_5613678: '1'
  _wpas_skip_5613660: '1'
author:
  login: admin
  email: peter.krautzberger@gmx.net
  display_name: admin
  first_name: ''
  last_name: ''


---

In [an earlier post](http://thelazyscience.blogspot.com/2009/12/matrices-vs-idempotent-ultrafilters.html) I gave a short introduction to an interesting finite semigroup. This semigroup could be found in the $2\times 2$ matrices over $\mathbf{Q}$.

When I met with said friend, one natural question came up: what other semigroups can we find this way?

The first few simple observations we made were

*   If either $A$ or $B$ is the identity matrix $I_2$ or the zero matrix $0_2$ the resulting semigroup will contain two elements with an identity or a zero element respectively.
*   In general, we can always add $I_2$ or $0_2$ to the semigroup generated by $A$ and $B$ and obtain a possibly larger one.
*   $A,B$ generate a finite semigroup iff $AB$ is of finite order (in the sense that the set of its powers is finite).
*   $AB$ has finite order iff its (nonvanishing) eigenvalue is $\pm 1$.
*   For $A$ of rank $1$ we may assume (by base change) that $A$ is one of the two matrices \[\begin{pmatrix} 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0\end{pmatrix}, \begin{pmatrix} 1 & 1 \\ 0 & 0 \end{pmatrix}\,.\]

So, as a first approach we thought about the following question.

**Question** If we take $A$ to be one of the above, what kind of options do we have for $B$, i.e., if $B$ is idempotent and $A,B$ to generate a finite semigroup?

Thinking about the problem a little and experimenting with [Macaulay 2](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Macaulay2) we ended up with the following classification

**Proposition** For $A = \begin{pmatrix} 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0\end{pmatrix}$ the solutions for $B$ being of rank one consist of four one – dimensional families, namely (for $x\in \mathbf{Q}$)  
 \[  
 F_1(x) = \begin{pmatrix} 1 & x \\ 0 & 0 \end{pmatrix},  
 F_2(x) = \begin{pmatrix} 1 & 0 \\ x & 0 \end{pmatrix},  
 F_3(x) = \begin{pmatrix} 0 & x \\ 0 & 1 \end{pmatrix},  
 F_4(x) = \begin{pmatrix} 0 & 0 \\ x & 1 \end{pmatrix}.  
 \]  
 Additionally, we have four special solutions  
 \[  
 G_1 = \begin{pmatrix} – 1 & 1 \\ – 2 & 2 \end{pmatrix},  
 G_2 = \begin{pmatrix} – 1 & – 1 \\ 2 & 2 \end{pmatrix},  
 G_3 = \begin{pmatrix} – 1 & 2 \\ – 1 & 2 \end{pmatrix},  
 G_4 = \begin{pmatrix} – 1 & – 2 \\ 1 & 2 \end{pmatrix}.  
 \]

Note: due to technical problems, this post continues [here](http://thelazyscience.blogspot.com/2010/01/testing.html) .

We can also describe size and the algebraic structure.

1.  $A$ with $F_1$ ($F_2$) generates a [right (left) zero semigroup](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Null_semigroup) (hence of size $2$, except for $x=0$).
2.  $A$ with $F_3$ or $F_4$ generates a semigroup with $AB$ [nilpotent](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nilpotent_matrix) (of size $4$, except for $x=0$, where we have the null semigroup of size $3$).
3.  $A$ with $G_i$ generate (isomorphic) semigroups of size $8$. These contain two disjoint right ideals, two disjoint left ideals generated by $A$ and $B$ respectively.

Luckily enough, we get something very similar from our alternative for $A$.

**Proposition** In case $A = \begin{pmatrix} 1 & 1 \\ 0 & 0 \end{pmatrix}$ the solutions for $B$ being of rank one consist of five one – dimensional families namely (for $x\in \mathbf{Q}$)  
 \[  
 H_1(x) = \begin{pmatrix} 1 & x \\ 0 & 0 \end{pmatrix},  
 H_2(x) = \begin{pmatrix} x+1 & x \\ ( – x – 1) & – x \end{pmatrix},  
 H_3(x) = \begin{pmatrix} 0 & x \\ 0 & 1 \end{pmatrix},  
 H_4(x) = \begin{pmatrix} ( – x+1) & ( – x+1) \\ x & x \end{pmatrix},  
 \]  
 \[  
 H_5(x) = \begin{pmatrix} ( – x+1) & ( – x – 1 – \frac{2}{x – 2}) \\ x – 2 & x \end{pmatrix} , x \neq 2.  
 \]

As before we can describe size and structure.

1.  $A$ with $H_1$ ($H_2$) generates a right (left) zero semigroup (as before).
2.  $A$ with $H_3$ or $H_4$ generates a semigroup with $AB$ nilpotent (as before).
3.  $A$ with $H_5$ generates the same $8$ element semigroup (as before).

Finally, it might be worthwhile to mention that the seemingly missing copies of the $8$ element semigroup are also dealt with; e.g. $ – G_i$ generates the same semigroup as $G_i$ etc.

It is striking to see that the orders of all finite semigroups generated by rational idempotent two by two matrices are either $2^k,2^k + 1$ or $2^k + 2$.

At first sight it seems strange that we cannot find other semigroups with two generators like this. As another friend commented, there’s just not enough space in the plane. I would love to get some geometric idea of what’s happening since my intuition is very poor. But that’s all for today.

<embed align="middle" allowfullscreen="true" flashvars="mode=embed&layout=http%3A%2F%2Fskin.issuu.com%2Fv%2Flight%2Flayout.xml&showFlipBtn=true&autoFlip=true&autoFlipTime=6000&documentId=100107220609-cd636dde77374210a92800d0835b1d30&docName=matrices_vs_idempotents2&username=thelazyscience&loadingInfoText=Matrices%20vs.%20idempotent%20ultrafilters%2C%20part%202&et=1262902109807&er=96" menu="false" name="flashticker" quality="high" salign="l" scale="noscale" src="http://static.issuu.com/webembed/viewers/style1/v1/IssuuViewer.swf" style="height: 297px; width: 420px;" type="application/x-shockwave-flash">